---
title: Publican v0.10.1 update
menu: false
description: Publican v0.10.1 fixes a problem with slug string replacement on HTML index files.
author: Craig Buckler
tags: SSG, update, tools
priority: 1.0
hero: images/slug.avif
heroWidth: 1200
heroHeight: 600
heroAlt: root
heroCaption: Image courtesy of <a href="https://unsplash.com/@alain_snel">Alain Snel</a>
---

[Publican v0.10.1](https://www.npmjs.com/package/publican) was released on <time datetime="${{ tacs.fn.format.dateISO( '2025-06-17' ) }}">${{ tacs.fn.format.dateHuman( '2025-06-17' ) }}</time>.

There should be no breaking changes, but the following features have been improved. *We're getting closer to a version 1.0.0 release!*


## Fixed slug string replacement issue

In previous Publican releases, [slug string replacement](--ROOT--docs/reference/publican-options#slug-string-replacement) occurred *after* the file path had been converted to a slug. Consider the following example which removes two or more digits followed by an underscore:

{{ `publican.config.js` excerpt }}
```js
// slug replacement - removes NN_
publican.config.slugReplace.set(/\d{2,}_/g, '');
```

The file path `path/01_index.md` is converted to `/path/01_index/index.html` first. The `slugReplace` would then convert that to `/path/index/index.html` and we get an unnecessary `index` path.

In v0.10.1, slug string replacement occurs first. The file `path/01_index.md` is converted to `/path/index.md` which then becomes `/path/index.html`.

The update is unlikely to break your site, but you may need to check paths are what you expect them to be.


## Word count accuracy improvement

Word counts on documents with embedded `<code>` sections should be more accurate.


## New Publican.dev tools documentation

There's a new [Tools](--ROOT--tools/) menu on this site that provides documentation for my other utilities that can help Publican site development.

1. [StaticSearch](--ROOT--tools/staticsearch/) -- my client-side search engine for static sites

1. [LiveLocalhost](--ROOT--tools/livelocalhost/) -- my tiny local development web server with automatic hot reloading


## Get started

The [Publican documentation](--ROOT--docs) provides a [quick start guide](--ROOT--docs/quickstart/concepts), a [detailed set-up guide](--ROOT--docs/setup/content), [API references](--ROOT--docs/reference/publican-options), and [common recipes](--ROOT--docs/recipe) you can use and adapt for your own projects.

<ul class="flexcenter">
  <li><a href="--ROOT--docs/quickstart/concepts" class="button">Get started</a></li>
  <li><a href="--ROOT--about/donate/" class="button">Donate</a></li>
</ul>
